[Design] Add design on recording and replay service (#1359)
ros2/rosbag2: docs/design/rosbag2_record_replay_service.md

# Rosbag2 record and replay service

## Context

In [ros2/rosbag2#773](https://github.com/ros2/rosbag2/issues/773), it was recommended that record service requests feature should be added to rosbag2.  

This design describe how to implement this feature based on current architecture and how to extend current command parameter.  

## How to save record service message

Service introspection ([ros2/ros2#1285](https://github.com/ros2/ros2/issues/1285)) had been implemented. All service messages (requests and responses) are published to service event topic which is hidden topic named as `_service_event` under service name (e.g. /add_two_ints/_service_event). So all messages in this topic can be recorded like general topic.

## How to distinguish service event topic in all recorded topics

Service event topic is saved like general topic. But they should use different process after reading from recording file. So they should be distinguished by topic name.

- General topic  
  
  [NameSpace/]TopicName

- Hidden topic  
  
  [NameSpace/]_TopicName

- Service event topic
  
  [NameSpace/]ServiceName/_service_event

> So if the string ends with `/_service_event` in topic name, it should be service event topic. Of course, it is possible that hidden topic has the same name. So message type is used for further check. The message type for service event topic must include `/srv/` and ends with `_Event` (e.g. example_interfaces/srv/AddTwoInts_Event). Therefore, service event topic can be identified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following criteria will be used to determine a service introspection topic:
1. The topic ends with `/_service_event`
1. The topic type name matches  `*/srv/*_Event` (e.g. `example_interfaces/srv/AddTwoInts_Event`)
```

Author: Thanks. This makes the expression clearer.

### Expand the 'record' command

Add 3 parameters.

> - `-S SerivceName1 [ServiceName2 ...]` or `--services SerivceName1 [ServiceName2 ...]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `-S ServiceName1 [ServiceName2 ...]` or `--services ServiceName1 [ServiceName2 ...]`
```

Author: Fixed

>     If the user doesn't specify service names, all service event topics are recorded.

Reviewer: This is overloaded with `--all-services`. I would prefer that `-S,--services` takes `nargs='+'` so the user _must_ specify some service if they use this option.

Author: Thanks. I forgot to update this description. User must specify at least one service.

1. The topic ends with `/_service_event`
2. The topic type name matches  `*/srv/*_Event` (e.g. `example_interfaces/srv/AddTwoInts_Event`)

### Expand the 'record' command

Add 5 parameters.

- `--services ServiceName1 [ServiceName2 ...]`
  
    Specify which services will be recorded. User must specify at least one service.

- `--all-topics`

    Record all topics. Hidden topics including service event topics are excluded.

- `--all-services`

    Record all service event topics.

- `--exclude-topics`

    Rename from `--exclude`. Exclude topics containing provided regular expression.

- `--exclude-services`

    Exclude services containing provided regular expression.

The description of the relevant parameter behavior.

| Parameter | Description |
| :-- | :--|
|--services ServiceName1 [ServiceName2 ...] | Record services (service event topics) with specified service names. |
| --all | Record all topics and service event topics. Other hidden topics are excluded. |
| --all-topics | Record all topics. Hidden topics including service event topics are excluded. |
| --all-services | Only record all service event topics. |

> | --exclude-topics | Exclude topics containing provided regular expression. |

Reviewer 2: @Barry-Xu-2018 Please add one more row about 
```
|--include-hidden-topics| Record all hidden topics. Include service event topic. |
```
To avoid confusion and explicitly define expectations.

Author: Okay. I supplement the description of `--include-hidden-topics`.

Bag size:          28.2 KiB
Storage id:        mcap
Duration:          15.59s
Start:             May 19 2023 13:22:25.340 (1684473745.340)
End:               May 19 2023 13:22:40.400 (1684473760.400)
Messages:          60
Topic information: Topic: /chatter | Type: std_msgs/msg/String | Count: 16 | Serialization Format: cdr
                   Topic: /events/write_split | Type: rosbag2_interfaces/msg/WriteSplitEvent | Count: 0 | Serialization Format: cdr
                   Topic: /parameter_events | Type: rcl_interfaces/msg/ParameterEvent | Count: 0 | Serialization Format: cdr
                   Topic: /rosout | Type: rcl_interfaces/msg/Log | Count: 44 | Serialization Format: cdr

>>>> The below is new added items for service <<<<<<<
Service : XX  <== The number of service
Service information: Service: /xxx/xxx | Type: xxx/xxx/xxx | Request Count: XX | Response Count: XX | Serialization Format: XX
                     Service: /xxx/xxx | Type: xxx/xxx/xxx | Request Count: XX | Response Count: XX | Serialization Format: XX
```

### Expand the 'play' command

Add 1 parameters.
- `--services ServiceName1 [[ServiceName2 ...]`

    Determine which service's requests are played.

> Other parameters need to be checked one by one. If it is unsuitable for playing service event, the description of parameter should be updated to mention this limitation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other parameters need to be checked one by one. If it is unsuitable for playing service event, the description of parameter should be updated to mention this limitation.

## Implementation Staging
Implementation is going to be split into two phases.
On phase 1 is expected to be implemented all functionality which is related to the service events recording.
On phase 2 the rest functionality related to the service requests playback.
The service requests playback is not straightforward to implement since we don't have API from rclcpp layer to be able to publish service requests with dynamically created type support. We will need to create an analog of the `GenericPublisher` i.e. `GenericClient` on the `rclcpp` layer to be able to do this. To facilitate implementation of the `GenericClient` we likely will need to add one more missing API:   
const rosidl_service_type_support_t * get_typesupport_handle_srv(
  const std::string & type,
  const std::string & typesupport_identifier,
  rcpputils::SharedLibrary & library)
Therefore, phase 2 will be implemented when the required new rclcpp API will be ready.
```

Service event topic is saved like general topic. But they should use different process after reading from recording file. So they should be distinguished by topic name.

- General topic  
  
  [NameSpace/]TopicName

- Hidden topic  
  
  [NameSpace/]_TopicName

- Service event topic
  
  [NameSpace/]ServiceName/_service_event

The following criteria will be used to determine a service event topic:
1. The topic ends with `/_service_event`
2. The topic type name matches  `*/srv/*_Event` (e.g. `example_interfaces/srv/AddTwoInts_Event`)

### Expand the 'record' command

Add 5 parameters.

- `--services ServiceName1 [ServiceName2 ...]`
  
    Specify which services will be recorded. User must specify at least one service.

- `--all-topics`

    Record all topics. Hidden topics including service event topics are excluded.

- `--all-services`

    Record all service event topics.

- `--exclude-topics`

    Rename from `--exclude`. Exclude topics containing provided regular expression.

- `--exclude-services`

    Exclude services containing provided regular expression.

The description of the relevant parameter behavior.

| Parameter | Description |
| :-- | :--|

> |--include-hidden-topics| Record all hidden topics. Include service event topic. |

Reviewer 3: this seems to be inconsistency for me.

as described above, service introspection topic is not one of the hidden topics, but this option includes the service event topic? as far as i see from the current discussion, this should not be included? just checking.

Author: You mean that description should not specifically emphasize “Include service event topic.” ？
Agree. I should remove it.

Author: After giving it some thought, I've decided to further discuss this point at https://github.com/ros2/rosbag2/pull/1359#discussion_r1246072371

|--services ServiceName1 [ServiceName2 ...] | Record services (service event topics) with specified service names. |
| --all | Record all topics and service event topics. Other hidden topics are excluded. |
| --all-topics | Record all topics. Hidden topics including service event topics are excluded. |
| --all-services | Only record all service event topics. |
| --exclude-topics | Exclude topics containing provided regular expression. |
| --exclude-services | Exclude services containing provided regular expression. |
| -e REGEX, --regex REGEX | Record only topics and service containing provided regular expression. |

### Change output of 'Info' command

A new parameter is added.

- `-v` or `--verbose`

>     This parameter only affect service event topic. if `-v` or `--verbose` is set, info command shows the number of request and response for each services based on service event. Otherwise, only show the number of service event. Note that parsing the number of request and response need spent time. The duration of the parsing is related to the number of recorded service events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This parameter only affects the service event topic. if `-v` or `--verbose` is set, the info command shows the number of requests and responses for each service based on the service event. Otherwise, only show the number of service events. Note that parsing the number of request and response need spent time. The duration of the parsing is related to the number of recorded service events.
```
Grammar fixes

Storage id:        mcap
Duration:          15.59s
Start:             May 19 2023 13:22:25.340 (1684473745.340)
End:               May 19 2023 13:22:40.400 (1684473760.400)
Messages:          60
Topic information: Topic: /chatter | Type: std_msgs/msg/String | Count: 16 | Serialization Format: cdr
                   Topic: /events/write_split | Type: rosbag2_interfaces/msg/WriteSplitEvent | Count: 0 | Serialization Format: cdr
                   Topic: /parameter_events | Type: rcl_interfaces/msg/ParameterEvent | Count: 0 | Serialization Format: cdr
                   Topic: /rosout | Type: rcl_interfaces/msg/Log | Count: 44 | Serialization Format: cdr

>>>> The below is new added items for service <<<<<<<
Service : XX  <== The number of service
Service information: Service: /xxx/xxx | Type: xxx/xxx/xxx | Request Count: XX | Response Count: XX | Serialization Format: XX
                     Service: /xxx/xxx | Type: xxx/xxx/xxx | Request Count: XX | Response Count: XX | Serialization Format: XX
```

### Expand the 'play' command

Add 2 parameters.  
- `--services ServiceName1 [[ServiceName2 ...]`

    Decide which services will be played.

- `--service-request-mode`

>     Replay service request with recorded sequence and interval instead of playing service event message.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure when non-service-request-mode is required though? do we have any use cases for this mode?

Author: I think I misunderstand phase 1 (https://github.com/ros2/rosbag2/pull/1359#issuecomment-1595530464). It should only do recording service event (Not want to play it. Phase 2 includes play. So only play request).  I will update it.

# Rosbag2 record and replay service

## Context

In [ros2/rosbag2#773](https://github.com/ros2/rosbag2/issues/773), it was recommended that record service requests feature should be added to rosbag2.  

This design describe how to implement this feature based on current architecture and how to extend current command parameter.  

## How to save record service message

Service introspection ([ros2/ros2#1285](https://github.com/ros2/ros2/issues/1285)) had been implemented. All service messages (requests and responses) are published to service introspection topic which is hidden topic named as `_service_event` under service name (e.g. /add_two_ints/_service_event). So all messages in this topic can be recorded like general topic. 

## How to distinguish service introspection topic in all recorded topics 

Service introspection is saved like general topic. But they should use different process after reading from recording file. So they should be distinguished by topic name.  

- General topic  
  
  [NameSpace/]TopicName

- Hidden topic  
  
  [NameSpace/]_TopicName

- Service introspection topic
  

>   [NameSpace/]ServiceName/_service_event

Reviewer 3: if we specify `ros2 bag record --include-hidden-topics`, this will be included as hidden topic currently? if that is so, `/_service_event` should be excluded from topic category for rosbag2 by default?

Author: Yes. If the user doesn't want to record service, service event topic ([NameSpace/]ServiceName/_service_event) is ignored even if the user set `--include-hidden-topics`.

Reviewer 4: IMO it would be more consistent to include service events in `--include-hidden-topics` since it is, after all, a hidden topic and not something special

Author: > IMO it would be more consistent to include service events in --include-hidden-topics since it is, after all, a hidden topic and not something special

In `rosbag2 info`, service information will be listed separately. So I prefer not to categorize service event topics as general hidden topics.  From the user's perspective, service event topics are hidden.  
What do you think ?

Reviewer: I agree that service introspection should be a separate feature from hidden topics. They have a similar implementation, but are different ideas, I think.

Author: Currently, we have some special options for service, such as `--all-services, --services`. So whether service should not be affected by `--include-hidden-topics`.  That is, service record cannot be enabled by `--include-hidden-topics`.  Users must explicitly indicate their intention to record services via e.g. `--all-services, --services`.   
What do you think ? @MichaelOrlov @ihasdapie

Reviewer 2: I tend to agree with @ihasdapie 
> IMO it would be more consistent to include service events in --include-hidden-topics since it is, after all, a hidden topic and not something special

It is what it is. Service events are hidden topics.

Reviewer 2: As far as I recall we have made the decision about `--include-hidden-topics` at one of the `Rosbag2 and Tooling WG` meetings last month. 
> 2. Decided that --include-hidden-topics will record service events as well, since it is just a hidden topic.

Here is the full summary from the meeting https://github.com/ros2/rosbag2/pull/1359#issuecomment-1574575492

Author: @MichaelOrlov Thanks for your confirmation. 

> As far as I recall we have made the decision about --include-hidden-topics at one of the Rosbag2 and Tooling WG meetings last month.

Yes. It is because new record options `--all-services` and `--all-topics` were added later. There is an option used to enable recording services. Now `--include-hidden-topics` also has the same effect. If users doesn't know service introspection, maybe they confuse the behavior of `--include-hidden-topics`.   
The behavior of  `--include-hidden-topics` will be described as you suggestion https://github.com/ros2/rosbag2/pull/1359#discussion_r1248317190

> So if the string ends with `/_service_event` in topic name, it should be service introspection topic. Of course, it is possible that hidden topic has the same name. So message type is used for further check. The message type for service introspection must ends with "_Event" (e.g. example_interfaces/srv/AddTwoInts_Event). Therefore, service introspection topic can be identified.

Reviewer 4: Checking for the `/srv`/ would be more robust

### Expand the 'record' command

Add 1 parameter.

- `-S [SerivceName1 ServiceName2 ...]` or `--services [SerivceName1 ServiceName2 ...]`
  

>     If the user doesn't specify service names, all service introspection topics are recorded.

Reviewer 3: as user experience, this could be opposite? i think most likely that user wants to record the topics but service. so having this option as `opt-in` would be better to avoid unnecessary topics to be recorded?

Author: Yes. 
Users can decide whether to set `-S` or `--services` or not.   
If user doesn't set `-S or --services`, rosbag doesn't record service (service event topic).

Reviewer 4: What will the default behaviour with --all? I take that it will include service events too?

Author: I don't want to change previous behavior. So '--all' only means all topic (Not include special service event topic).  
To make it clearer, '--all' may be changed to '--all-topics'.   
Or like service parameter, '--all' and specified topics are combined to '--topics [TopicName ...]' (If no topic name is specified, all topics are recorded). But this change is a little big for user.

Reviewer 2: @Barry-Xu-2018 As regards to the 
> I don't want to change previous behavior. So '--all' only means all topic (Not include special service event topic).

As far as I remember we agreed on the version 
https://github.com/ros2/rosbag2/pull/1359/files#diff-cc475e77d25d214937d96658f496944c9dbf1b0dd6e01fc776528672300841bcR62
```
| --all | Record all topics and service event topics. Other hidden topics are excluded. |
```
I am closing this thread as resolved. If the proposed resolution is not complete or not as expected please feel free to mark it as unresolved again.

Author: > As far as I remember we agreed on the version

Yes. https://github.com/ros2/rosbag2/pull/1359#discussion_r1211203374 is old comments.   
We have reached a consensus on this.

### Change output of 'Info' command

Topic for service introspection should be listed distinctively, as below example.

```
Files:             123_0.mcap
Bag size:          28.2 KiB
Storage id:        mcap
Duration:          15.59s
Start:             May 19 2023 13:22:25.340 (1684473745.340)
End:               May 19 2023 13:22:40.400 (1684473760.400)
Messages:          60
Topic information: Topic: /chatter | Type: std_msgs/msg/String | Count: 16 | Serialization Format: cdr
                   Topic: /events/write_split | Type: rosbag2_interfaces/msg/WriteSplitEvent | Count: 0 | Serialization Format: cdr
                   Topic: /parameter_events | Type: rcl_interfaces/msg/ParameterEvent | Count: 0 | Serialization Format: cdr
                   Topic: /rosout | Type: rcl_interfaces/msg/Log | Count: 44 | Serialization Format: cdr

>>>> The below is new added items for service introspection <<<<<<<
Service Events: XX  
Service information: Service: /xxx/xxx | Type: xxx/xxx/xxx | Event Count: XX | Serialization Format: XX

>                      Service: /xxx/xxx | Type: xxx/xxx/xxx | Event Count: XX | Serialization Format: XX

Reviewer 3: this incudes everything as `event`? i would expect that it can show `request` and `response` separately, so that user can understand how many requests and responses are recorded via `info` command?

Author: When retrieving information from requests and responses, it requires deserializing the recorded message and parsing the data inside.   
This process can slow down the "info" command when dealing with large recording files (record many service events).   
However, we can consider adding a new parameter that allows users to specify whether they want to retrieve detailed service information. What do you think?

Reviewer 4: I think it makes sense to include the number of request/responses by default. I can see it being useful for users who might want to check if a bag includes requests or reponses, or if they want to investigate dropped responses.  Plus, `ros2 bag info` isn't the most performance critical command anyways

Author: > I think it makes sense to include the number of request/responses by default. 

Okay. 

> This process can slow down the "info" command when dealing with large recording files (record many service events).
However, we can consider adding a new parameter that allows users to specify whether they want to retrieve detailed service information. What do you think?

Sorry. I forgot that metadata file was created after recording. Typically, this file exists, which eliminates the need for re-analyzing the recording file. That is, info can be parsed from this file.

Reviewer: Yes, we can keep metadata of `num_requests, num_responses` at recording time, and store that as metadata about the topic

Author: > Yes, we can keep metadata of num_requests, num_responses at recording time, and store that as metadata about the topic

If we want to get num_requests and num_responses, we have to deserialize service event message to parse this information during recording. In order to avoid affecting performance, we plan to not get num_requests and num_responses while recording. Instead, if user execute info command with `-v`', num_requests and num_responses will be parsed from recorded file.

Reviewer 3: the option sounds okay, but i am included to have this information in default. i am with https://github.com/ros2/rosbag2/pull/1359/files#r1211126103 for default behavior. after all, either is fine to me.

Author: Getting the number of request and response need to spend time to parse bag file.   
If bag file is big and users only want to check topic information, users have to wait parsing service information.   
So not set as default mode.

```

### Expand the 'play' command

Add 2 parameters.  
- `-S [ServiceName1 ...]` or `--services [ServiceName1 ...]` (TBD: Not sure whether this is needed.)
    

>     Replay service events. If there is no service name set, all recorded service events are played.  User can use `ros2 service echo ServiceName` to check different service events. 

Reviewer 3: I believe that this is related to `motivation` section, i am not sure the actual use case for this.

one think i can think of is, publishing all service events recorded in rosbag2 to transmit to the another remote node running over the network to share. i do not think this is major use case for this... any thoughts? i am not even sure if we need to have this option.

Author: Yes.  I'm not sure if this is indeed an actual use case.  
Let's listen to the opinions of others.

Reviewer 4: I think this is already implictly handled via `--topics` so there's no real need for this.

Author: > I think this is already implictly handled via --topics so there's no real need for this.

In this design, my thought is that the service event topic is not a regular topic. Therefore, users should not be aware of the existence of this topic (for example, the 'info' command will not display information about this topic, instead users can only see the information related to service request/response).

Reviewer: I think we should not have a `-S,--services` option for `play`. The user can `--exclude */_service_event` if they want to skip these topics.

Author: > I think we should not have a -S,--services option for play. The user can --exclude */_service_event if they want to skip these topics.

Yes.  
The inclusion of the '-S' parameter was initially intended to exclude service event topics from being played by default.

Reviewer 2: @Barry-Xu-2018 I agree with @emersonknapp adding `-s` and `--service` for playback to act as service exclusion will very confuse users because we have exactly the same parameters on the recording where they act as the service inclusion which is semantically opposite.  
The user can `--exclude */_service_event` if they want to skip these topics.

Author: Sorry. Maybe I misunderstand emersonknapp's comments.   

`--services ServiceName1 [ServiceName2]` isn't used for exclusion.  It is used for inclusion. Like `-topics TOPICS [TOPICS ...]`.  
About exclusion, record option includes `--exclude-topics` and `--exclude-services`. Taking consistency into consideration, I think we should also have 2 parameters in play option for exclusion.   

About another play option in design 
```
- `--services-requests [ServiceName1 ...]`

    Replay request with recorded sequence and interval. If there is no service name set, all recorded service request are sent.
```

I will remove it since play only sends the request for service (Not send service event message)

Summary for play option
- `-services ServiceName1 [ServiceName2]`
     User can choose which services' requests are played.  
- `-e REGEX, --regex REGEX`
     Affect both topic and service
- `--exclude-topics`
     Exclude topics
- `--exlude-services`
     Exclude services

What do you think ? @MichaelOrlov

Reviewer 2: @Barry-Xu-2018 Summary for the play option looks good to me :+1:

- `--services-requests [ServiceName1 ...]`

>     Replay request with recorded sequence and interval. If there is no service name set, all recorded service request are sent.

Reviewer 3: i think user likely wants to do is to debug the service server in this case.
`rosbag2` can only replay service requests in the bag file but not print the response result from the service server.
so user needs to start `ros2 service echo` in another terminal to see the service request and response to evaluate.
which is not related to design or implementation for rosbag2, but i think that would be better to describe as practice?

Reviewer: Is this feature suggesting that `ros2 bag play` creates service clients and sends requests with original timing if service is available?

Author: > Is this feature suggesting that ros2 bag play creates service clients and sends requests with original timing if service is available?

Yes.

  
  [NameSpace/]_TopicName

- Service event topic
  
  [NameSpace/]ServiceName/_service_event

The following criteria will be used to determine a service event topic:
1. The topic ends with `/_service_event`
2. The topic type name matches  `*/srv/*_Event` (e.g. `example_interfaces/srv/AddTwoInts_Event`)

### Expand the 'record' command

Add 3 parameters.

- `-S ServiceName1 [ServiceName2 ...]` or `--services ServiceName1 [ServiceName2 ...]`
  
    Specify which services will be recorded. User must specify at least one service.

- `--all-topics`

>     Record all topics. Hidden topic are excluded (include service event topics).

Reviewer 2: It doesn't make sense to include service event topics in `--all-topics` if we will have `--all` command which will be doing exactly the same.
It will be more reasonable to have `--all-topics` options when only regular topics without service events would be recorded. 
I was under the impression that we clarified this case in some of the comments above and after the last WG meeting.

Reviewer 2: After some consideration, it seems I misunderstood the phrase 
> Hidden topic are excluded (include service event topic)  

To avoid confusion for others I would suggest rewording it to be more clear. 
Something like. **"Hidden topics, including service event topics are excluded."**

Author: > To avoid confusion for others I would suggest rewording it to be more clear.
> Something like. "Hidden topics, including service event topics are excluded."

Sorry to make you confused.  
I will update description as your suggestion.
